{Orange Notebook}

The mountain reddens; chickens call
acorns down from a tree.

If the world is an illusion,
what matter
if one more caged beast escapes?


Scapoli, 2017.
Haunted by the thought that I have pulled my children across an ocean, running away from a toxic culture that seems to be an allergy peculiar to me.  That perhaps my ceaseless pulling is not heroic at all: not an act of saving them but of holding them back from happiness.  That I am a tether, holding their brightness close to me because I do not have my own.

I feel mostly solitary here, no different than ever.  Except that each moment is buoyed by an undercurrent - centuries of human attention pored over the radiating stone streets, the arches vaulting each sequent courtyard's haven.  And beyond, the mountains.  Eons-old, the dizzy escarpments and chloropyll-clotted ridges.

At home among the aged accumulations, as among the distilled richness of poems or oil paintings.  





You have to be alive to give your life.  

To slowly scrape away one's humanity until it is a trinket, easy to part with, is not the thick-blooded love of the martyrs.

On the contrary, it would almost be a relief to part with this trinket self, to relinquish its choices to corporations and its ideas to machines.

It has been hardest to remember the blood in our veins.

We return to the plainest facts as though they were visions.

The miracle of mere fact tugs against delusion.

Vast, ingenious machinery of self-deception.

----

The bark of beeches, broken from inside.
Grown large from fear of want.

(There is always enough, though enough may exclude me.)

All scars are an encounter with our limits.
Skinned knees, surgeries. The House of God.

----

I fear that I will fail, or
I fear that the works of my hands will fail, or
I fear that my works are my worth, or 
I fear that my children are my works, and 
I do not let them loose to the wind
to create and be created, or
I fear that my children will see my failure
and judge themselves the fruit of failure
and close themselves away from open hope, or
I fear that I will fail 
and no one will know, 
and I will not change.

----

Furious black flies, my eyes 
scribble over the landscape.  Clicking windows.
Seeking distraction from gravity.

----

"Blessed is the man, whose hope is in the Name of the Lord,
& who hath not looked upon vanities and false frenzies."  - Ps. 39, For the end

How can hope rest in a name?  
How is that name an antidote to frenetic madness?

----

Town facing the,
made of the mountains

Travertine citadel. 
Angles and convolutions.

Rain flows through
stone rooms.

Grass grasps
whichever interstice.

----

The tight dance, turn
& counterturn, blind

bends beneath clotheslines
dried by a sun's echoes.

Alleys open upon
infinite hills

gathering upon hills, over
groves shimmer 
& grooves

All we have made 
rides this slow tumult, turn
& counterturn

Vastness hunts us.  This view
peering through halls into
our daily round

----

O Cell, whose nucleus is Hell

----

A seed seems a stone.

What has left, when life is gone?

Metabolism, a translation

"We are all lost in translation..." - J. Merrill
"...we will all be changed" - St. Paul

Unlike an elephant, a root will grow forever
given adequate nutrition

----

10.17.17 Monte Marrone

Moss clasps rock facets.
Persistent tufts.

Miniature coral stilled.

----

branching calligraphy of ache and fulfillment

----

Birdsong.

Valleys of sound between rippling rock.

Catch in the throat, upturned stone.

With what language can I tell 
you the mountain?

----

Montecassino.  10.18.17

S. Benedict is buried here.  Strange to come to a place where the rule, and the marking of hours, the keeping of time, were implemented.

People move from the flail of civilization to a remote place on a mountain.  They press numbers into their days, discipline into their flesh.  Their spines curl above pages of glyphs, a terrarium of symbols.

These people went to stick their hands into something true -- and likely did.

Now strangely their tools have descended the mountain, and just as those monks felt lost in the tumult of their dying flesh and removed themselves, now I am lost in an infinite (though not eternal) grid of time and information.  And I feel remote from the ground of my life, here on a mountain of logic, of sequence without consequence.

How do tools of spirit twist and become viral?

By using them to control others?  In the monastery, one 'took on' the clock (or bell) just as one 'took on' the task of copying.  Like a mantle.

Now, however, it would seem almost absurd to speak about having a choice of whether to abide by the clock.

[Except in small towns, perhaps, where people are known and have a grace for the unnevenness of time.]

Today the impulse toward the sacred is often an impulse away from rules, abstractions, bureaucracies.  It pulses toward the physical ground of our being.  To touch the dirt of ones death and stay there with it.

----

[Visiting the Samnite ruins at Pietrabbondante]

Cyclopean walls, stones shaved into interlocking polygons.

Imagine what it must have have like for the first people to see stone cut into a cube.

As if an idea had been pulled clean into the raw world.  A waking dream.

Imagine some of them turning back home, ransacking their own minds in fear that something might escape.  A weapon too large for the earth to bear.  Or, that having thought only of themselves, they might wake again and again beside statues of themselves.

Imagine some of them backing away slowly, concerned that the cube would evaporate, unthought.  That without being held in the mind, such a thing could not retain its being.

But the world was large, and they did move away.  And the apparitions multiplied on shelves, and in the pits beside their towns.

----

We stumble, again and again, upon discarded dreams.  These make the walls of our homes.

----

In the medium of mind, a smooth line takes less work.
In the medium of rock, more work.

----

Fiumicino 10/20

It is tempting, here in the airport, to never learn the language; not to have the mind clasped by billboards or other backlit chatter.  Or to learn the sounds only, to stay embodied.

Airports are among the most disembodied experiences, perhaps as anaesthesia to help one get into a fiery, hurtling silo.

----

The striving toward 'unity' is by necessity a striving against life.

Intend harmony, not unity.

The only ONE I'm aiming for is one big mess.

Interesting that the Islamic doctrine of *jihad*, which means "striving", comes to depict a political theory of a single world state: a mirror of the single Allah.  Striving to hasten entropy, rather than to avoid it.

American culture sets itself so vehemently against Islam because it sees there its own mirror image: monoculture, strong centralized state, the Fed, etc.  All are leanings toward the entropic maw of the One.

----

Curl around this tree
amond the decorative landscaping of the strip mall
and feel for its history

----

Does something like mycelleum branch out and connect me with C., Isaac, Ezra, Nadia, Soren?  Away from them I literally feel unrooted.  My synapses flail from thing to thing to thing (binge watching, binge everything)...

as if I am excised from my own body (a state amplified by being in America, where everything feels disembodied).

I move in a realm of untethered ideas - replicable, replaceable. What difference is there from one parking lot to the other?

----

Ezra Pound's dictum to "MAKE IT NEW" is not an unbridled praise of novelty, but an urging to...

MAKE: Create and build by interacting with what has come before ("let there be commerce among us"), using...
IT: ...the materials and living among them.
NEW:  The newness is the Life, as a flower in spring is new despite having a familiar form.

Any excavation shows that this is what has been perenially done: churches are buily on pagan sites, Medieval walls on Roman foundations, etc.  Our received world and culture constitute what Chesterton calls the 'democracy of the dead'.

We live at the end of this long branch.

It almost paralyzes one to take a first step, knowing that it will echo down in time, except that this is an illusion.  THere is no first step, only the ceaseless layered pulse to make and remake.

----

(The marketing perversion of this would be simply "NEW NEW NEW", without the act of creativity or attentiveness to what came before)

----

"It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of a Living GOD" - St. Paul

Our fear is most often fear of death.
But here, it is fear of life: yet a Life so infinitely wild that it burgeons and jostles constantly against the borders of death (& injury & grafting & coupling)

O tangled bank, O bacteria 
multiplying unfathomably Alive

Life is fearful because it brims
(perches on the lip of the cup)
over unto death,
                 & then, impossibly,
                 grows in death's dark soil

Live. = Do not fear.

----

[MAKE IT NEW]

making poems with the 'literal' materials of history, with texts, in a way which simultaneously:
(a) recycles their materials &
(b) engages with their thought/view of the world &
(c) forms something new and worth living in

Some texts:
- "On the Construction of the Heavens" Herschel
- The Rule of St. Benedict
- "Foundations of Geology" Lyell
- Upanishads
- 'De Rerum Naturae' Lucretius

----

A language dies out approximately every 2 weeks.

----

Back in America 1 week and already I feel strung out.  Work, obligations, &c. but also something about the phenomenology of daily sights here.  There is a kind of perennial, low-level crisis that is continually presented to me: the crisis of choice.

Options for stores abound, but there are precious few public benches to sit on.

I feel continually impelled to move (to work, to meet obligations, to find some 'new' vantage), and this pressure pushes me faceforward into choice, choice, choice (small choices, none of which touch the core of me).

Nothing is old.  Everything has the hint of being replaceable.  So we stretch to make ourselves a little taller, to stick out from the flat (and constantly remade) horizon.  In Italy I know I am mortal and am at peace with the fact: a breath on the ruins.

Perhaps this is why we Americans cling to morals, because they serve as a kind of Platonic 'idea' we can fasten our mulching identities to.  An Idol Identity, rather than living and climbing among mountains of an ancient truth we can never fully apprehend.

Outside > Inside.

Foster humility.

'The Brain is wide than the Sky', but we only inhabit the corners of it.  

Plus, the sky is full of brains.

----

Is there an essential differnce between the choice of (a) Products, (b) Roads?

We speak about consumerism, but do not wholly consume the things we buy; do not take them into ourselves mindfully and let them change us.  If only we did...

(Instead of consumerism, we should speak of 'decorationism')

Choice is both a road and a drink: a path we take into ourselves.  See Alice and Wonderland, the Eucharist.

A road changes... [...who we are contextually] [...where we are physically]
A food changes... [...where we are chemically] [...what we are physically]

And an angel came, holding
an aerial path
a gravel road
saying "Take, eat..."
wind by wind
stone by stone

Q: "Which pill?"
A: "The one that is larger than you."
or, "The one that makes you smaller is the one that makes you everything."

----

I smoke to mark the air, my breath

(censing, sensing)

but I must learn all breath to be remarkable.

... make me whole and undivided.

LOGOS :: Ratio
in-breath and out-breath

(To glide on the rails of my breath.
Stand on its promontory.)

----


